Gichuka-Churched Adult and English-Churched Adults

Eciteri - Esther

Title: King Xerxes becomes angry with Queen Vashti.
Esther 1:1 A man named Xerxes was the king of many countries. King Xerxes ruled the people who were living in 127 countries. He ruled all of the countries that were between India and Cush.
Title: Cakceci akĩthũra nĩ Baciti.
Eciteri 1:1 Mbuku ĩno yatarĩrĩrĩtie maũntũ marĩa me-karĩkire bĩndĩ ĩrĩa Cakceci arĩ mũthamaki. Cakceci nĩ a-thire antũ marĩa ma-tũũraga nthĩ ĩgana rĩa mĩrongo ĩrĩ na mũgwanja. Nthĩ inu cia-rĩ gatagatĩ ka India na Kuci.

Esther 1:2 At that time King Xerxes was living in his palace that was in a city named Susa.
Eciteri 1:2 Bĩndĩ Cakceci nĩ a-tũũraga kwa mũnene awe kũrĩa kwa-rĩ taũni yetagwa Cuca.

Esther 1:3 When King Xerxes had been the king for about three years, he invited all of the rulers and all of the officials to come to a feast. He also invited the leaders of Persia, the leaders of Media, all of the princes, and all of the powerful people who were living in his kingdom to come to that feast.
Eciteri 1:3 Rĩrĩa Cakceci a-rĩ mũthamaki, mwaka wa kathatũ e-tire athamaki monthe na anene monthe mace kĩathoni. Atongoria ma mbũtũ ya Bacia, atongoria ma mbũtũ ya Mindia, nthaka cia athamaki, na athamaki marĩa ma-tũũraga nthĩ cia Cakceci nĩ ma-cire kĩathoni.

Esther 1:4 For 180 days King Xerxes showed his great wealth to all of the people who were at that feast. He also showed those people that he was very great.
Eciteri 1:4 Kabinda ka ntukũ ĩgana rĩa mĩrongo ĩnana, Cakceci o-nirie ũtonga wa ũthamaki wawe antũ monthe marĩa ma-rĩ kĩathoni kĩu. Akĩnonia antũ mau a-rĩ mwega mũno.

Esther 1:5 After that feast ended, King Xerxes invited all of the people who were living in Susa to come to another feast. That feast was in the garden that was at Xerxes' palace. King Xerxes invited the powerful people who were living in Susa to come to that feast. And he also invited the people who weren't important to come to that feast. He celebrated for seven days with those people.
Eciteri 1:5 Thuuba ya kĩatho kĩu kũthira, Cakceci e-tire antũ monthe marĩa ma-tũũraga Cuca ma-cire kĩathoni ngĩ. Kĩatho kĩu kĩa-rĩ mũgũndani ũrĩa wa-rĩ kwa mũneneni a Cakceci kabinda ka matukũ mũgwanja. Cakceci nĩ e-tire antũ mau bata na antũ mau bata bururu ma-cire kĩathoni kĩu.

Esther 1:6 Before the guests came to the garden, the king's servants hung white curtains and blue curtains there. They attached the curtains to marble pillars using silver rings. They also put gold couches and silver couches in the garden. The garden floor was made of marble, shells, and valuable gems.
Eciteri 1:6 <<Mbere ya ageni mau ma-ca mũgũndani,>> mbathia cia rangi ĩ njeru cia nkoora na mbathia cia nkoora mburuu cia-curirwe mũgũndani. Cia-gwatithanĩtue na ikingi cia mabiga ma goro na thigũ cia rũthuku, mĩkanda ya rangi ĩ njeru ya nkoora, na reco babũ. Itĩ cia thaabu na itĩ cia rũthuku nĩ ci-ĩkĩrwe mũgũndani. Mũgũnda wa-rĩ na mabiga mathaka, mabiga ma goro, ikonyo, na ruru cia bata. 
Footnote: Kĩathoni, antũ me-tiirĩte na itĩ makĩrĩcaga.

Esther 1:7 The guests drank wine from gold cups. There were many kinds of cups. King Xerxes gave a lot of wine to the people because he was very generous.
Eciteri 1:7 Ageni mau nĩ ma-nyunyaga ndibei ya-rĩ ikombeni cia thaabu. Kwa-rĩ na ikombe cia mĩthemba mĩngĩ. Cakceci nĩ a-nenkere antũ mau ndibei mĩngĩ nĩ ũntũ a-rĩ mũtugani mũno.

Esther 1:8 King Xerxes commanded the servants to give a lot of wine to all of the people. So all of the people drank a lot of wine.
Eciteri 1:8 Cakceci a-thire atũmwa metĩkĩrĩrie ageni monthe anyue ndibei yonthe ĩrĩa e-ndaga. Mũthamaki a-mwĩrire anenkere antũ monthe ndibei yonthe ĩrĩa e-tirie mũtũmwa. <<Kwogu antũ mau monthe makĩnyua ndibei mĩngĩ.>>

Esther 1:9 Queen Vashti also had a feast. She invited all of the women who were living in the king's palace to come to that feast.
Eciteri 1:9 Baciti anawe a-rĩ na kĩatho na aka monthe marĩa ma-tũũraga nyomba ya Cakceci.

Esther 1:10 After seven days King Xerxes was very happy because he drank a lot of wine. Seven eunuchs served King Xerxes. So King Xerxes called those seven eunuchs. Those eunuchs' names were Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, Abagtha, Zethar, and Carcas.
Eciteri 1:10 Ntukũ ya mũgwanja Cakceci a-kenaga mũno nĩ ũntũ a-nyuĩte ndibei mĩngĩ. Kwogu agĩta antũ abakũre marĩa mũgwanja marĩa ma-mũrutĩrĩte wĩra. <<Antũ abakũre mau mũgwanja nĩ ma-menyerere aka ma Cakceci.>> Me-tagwa Meumani, Bicitha, Abona, Bigitha, Abagatha, Cetha, na Kakaci.

Esther 1:11 Then King Xerxes ordered those seven eunuchs to bring Queen Vashti to him. He wanted Queen Vashti to wear Vashti's crown. And he wanted to show the queen to all of the princes and the other guests because she was very beautiful.
Eciteri 1:11 Cakceci a-thire antũ abakũre mau mũgwanja mabire Baciti kũrĩ we. E-ndaga Baciti ekĩre kĩraũni kĩawe. Na e-ndire kwonia antũ monthe na athamaki mũka mũthaka wa mũthamaki. Nĩ ũntũ mũka wa mũthamaki a-rĩ mũthaka mũno.

Esther 1:12 So those seven eunuchs went to Queen Vashti and told her that the king wanted the guests to see Queen Vashti. But Queen Vashti didn't obey the king. Then King Xerxes became very angry.
Eciteri 1:12 Kwogu antũ abakũre mau mũgwanja makĩnathiĩ kũrĩ Baciti makĩmwĩra atha ya mũthamaki. Ĩndĩ Baciti nĩ a-regire a-thiĩre kũrĩ mũthamaki. Cakceci akĩnathũra mũno <<nĩ ũntũ mũka ũnu a-tĩmwathĩkĩrĩte>>. A-thũrire mũno.

Esther 1:13 Before the king punished a person, he always talked about the problem to men who knew the law well. So he talked to some wise men about Queen Vashti.
Eciteri 1:13 <<Kwogu Cakceci nĩ e-ndaga kũbũra Baciti.>> Matukũni mau <<mbere ya mũthamaki a-bũra mũntũ,>> nĩ a-ragia rĩonthe na antũ marĩa ma-menyaga wega watho bwa thĩna. Kwogu Cakceci akĩaria na antũ mamwe ũũgĩ marĩa me-reagwa watho bwa Baciti.

Esther 1:14 The names of the wise men that the king trusted were Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, and Memukan. Those seven wise men were from Persia and Media. They were the most important officials in Xerxes' kingdom. The king talked to those seven men often.
Eciteri 1:14 Mũthamaki a-ririe na antũ mau mũgwanja. Antũ mau ũũgĩ nĩ me-tagwa Kacena, Cetaa, Andimatha, Tacici, Mereci, Macena, na Memukani. Antũ mau mũgwanja marĩa ũũgĩ ma-rĩ ma kuuma Bacia na ma kuuma Mindia. Antũ mau nĩ ma-thiĩre kũrĩ mũthamaki. Marĩa ũũgĩ ma-rĩ anene bata bururu ũthamaki wa Cakceci.

Esther 1:15 King Xerxes asked those men, “How should I punish the queen? What does the law say? I want to punish the queen because she didn't obey me.”
Eciteri 1:15 Cakceci a-ũririe antũ mau, “Mabatiĩ kũrũthua Baciti? Watho wugĩte ũ? Nĩĩrire antũ abakũre mau mere Baciti atha. Ĩndĩ Baciti a-taciathĩka.”

Esther 1:16 Memukan said to the king and the other wise men, “Queen Vashti acted badly. Queen Vashti treated you, all of the rulers, and all of the people who are living in the kingdom badly.
Eciteri 1:16 Rĩu Memukani akĩra mũthamaki na antũ mau mangĩ ũũgĩ, “Baciti arũthire. Baciti nĩ akũrũthire ũntũ mũthũku. Na arũthire athamaki mau monthe ũntũ mũthũku na antũ monthe marĩa magũtũũra nthamaki ciaku.

Esther 1:17 All of the women who are living in this kingdom will hear about the things that Queen Vashti did. The women will hear that you ordered Queen Vashti to come to you. And the women will hear that Queen Vashti didn't come to you. Then the women won't obey their husbands.
Eciteri 1:17 Aka monthe <<marĩa matũũraga ũthamaki ũyũ>> makegua bwa maũntũ marĩa Baciti a-rũthire. <<Makegua wa-thire Baciti ace kũrĩ weũ.>> <<Na makegua Baciti a-taca kũrĩ weũ.>> Makĩnathĩkĩra arũme mao. Makauga, “Cakceci a-thire Baciti ace kũrĩ we. Ĩndĩ Baciti a-tathiĩ kũrĩ we.”

Esther 1:18 Today in Persia and in Media the important officials' wives will hear about the things that Queen Vashti did. Then those officials' wives won't obey their husbands. So many officials will become very angry with their wives.
Eciteri 1:18 Aka ma athamaki makegua ũmũnthi bwa maũntũ marĩa Baciti a-rũthire Baciani na Mindiani. Rĩu matĩmarũtha. Kwogu athamaki engĩ makathũra mũno aka mao.

Esther 1:19 Therefore, you should write a new law. This new law will be for all of the people who are living in Media and Persia. You shouldn't allow people to change this new law. This new law will say that Queen Vashti must not come to you again. And you should choose another woman. That woman will become the queen. That woman will become a better queen than Queen Vashti.
Eciteri 1:19 Kwogu wooni wakwa nĩ kũrĩ mũthamaki wandĩke watho mũerũ. Watho ũyũ mũerũ ũkandĩkua antũ monthe marĩa magũtũũra Mindia na Bacia. Gũtĩ mũntũ nĩ makagarũra watho ũyũ mũerũ. Watho ũyũ mũerũ ũkauga Baciti nwa nkinya atĩgace kũrĩ Cakceci rĩngĩ. Na nĩ batiĩ kũthuura mũka ũngĩ. Mũka ũnu agatuĩka mũka ũnu. Agatuĩka mũka.

Esther 1:20 We'll tell all of the people who live in your kingdom about this new law. Then all of the women who live in your kingdom will obey their husbands. The important women will obey their husbands. And all of the other women also will obey their husbands.”
Eciteri 1:20 Kerwa bwa watho ũyũ mũerũ antũ monthe marĩa matũũraga ũthamaki waku. Rĩu nĩrĩo aka monthe <<marĩa matũũraga ũthamaki waku>> magatĩĩa arũme mao. Antũ bata magatĩĩua. Na antũ bata bururu magatĩĩua.”

Esther 1:21 King Xerxes and the other wise men agreed with Memukan. So King Xerxes did all of the things that Memukan said.
Eciteri 1:21 Cakceci na antũ mau mangĩ ũũgĩ me-tĩkanĩrĩrie na Memukani. Kwogu akĩrũtha maũntũ monthe marĩa Memukani a-ugire.

Esther 1:22 King Xerxes sent letters to all of the people who were living in his kingdom. The king's secretaries wrote those letters in many languages. The king's new law said that each man has to rule his family.
Eciteri 1:22 Cakceci a-tũmire barũa kũrĩ antũ monthe marĩa ma-tũũraga ũthamaki wawe. Atũmwa ma-ciabirĩre ũthamaki ũnthe. Barũa inu nĩ cia-ndĩkirwe thiomi ĩngĩ. Watho mũerũ wa mũthamaki nĩ wa-nĩrĩre mũntũ ũnthe nwa athire mũciĩ wawe. Na mũntũ ũnthe ar rũthiomi rũrĩa a-thomire aciari mawe.



