Ibwe-Unchurched Adults and English-Unchurched Adults


Kajadian  -  Genesis


Genesis 1:1 In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.
Genesis 1:1 Pamugaan, Allah manjadiakan langit wan bumi.

Genesis 1:2 The earth was formless and empty. Darkness was covering the deep water. And the Spirit of God was hovering over the water.
Genesis 1:2 Bumi baluman bapotongan wan puang. Manukupi banyu nang dalam. Lalu Ruh Kudus Allah malayang-layang atas banyu.

Genesis 1:3 Then God said, “Let there be light.” Then there was light.
Genesis 1:3 Lalu Allah baucap, “Baadalah cahaya.” Lalu ada cahaya.

Genesis 1:4 God looked at the light and knew that it was good. Then he separated the light from the darkness.
Genesis 1:4 Allah malihat cahaya wan tahu bahawa itu bagus. Lalu cahaya dipisahakanNya matan.

Genesis 1:5 God called the light 'day' and called the darkness 'night'. Literal Alternate: That evening and that morning were the first day. Dynamic Alternate: God did these things on the first day.
Genesis 1:5 Allah manyambat cahaya 'hari' lalu disambatNya 'malam'.

Genesis 1:6 Then God said, “Let there be a vault that will be between the water. That vault will separate the water that is below it from the water that is above it.”
Genesis 1:6 Lalu Allah baucap, “Baadalah kubah di tangah banyu. Kubah nang itu cagar mamisahakan banyu di bawah itu matan banyu nang baada di atas itu.”

Genesis 1:7 And so God made a vault and separated the water that was below it from the water that was above it. And it was so.
Genesis 1:7 Maka Allah maulah kubah lalu banyu di bawah itu dipisahakanNya matan banyu nang baada di atas itu.

Genesis 1:8 God called that vault 'sky'. Literal Alternate: That evening and that morning were the second day. Dynamic Alternate: God did these things on the second day.
Genesis 1:8 Allah manyambat kubah nang itu 'langit'. (Literal alternate:) Malam nang itu, wan baisukan nang itu hari nang kadua. (Dynamic alternate:) Allah malakuakan nang ini pada hari nang kadua.

Genesis 1:9 Then God said, “Let the water that is under the sky be gathered. And let dry ground appear.” And it was so.
Genesis 1:9 

Genesis 1:10 God called the dry ground 'land' and called the water that he had gathered 'seas'. He looked at the land and the seas and knew that they were good.
Genesis 1:10 

Genesis 1:11 Then God said, “Let the earth produce plants. And those plants will produce seeds. And trees will produce fruit that contains seeds. Each seed will produce a plant. And that plant will be the same kind of plant that produced the seed.” And it was so.
Genesis 1:11 

Genesis 1:12 So the earth started producing plants. Each plant produced seeds. And each seed produced a plant. And that plant was the same kind of plant that had produced the seed. And trees produced fruit that contained seeds. Each seed produced a tree. And that tree was the same kind of tree that had produced the seed. God looked at those plants and knew that they were good.
Genesis 1:12 

Genesis 1:13 Literal Alternate: That evening and that morning were the third day. Dynamic Alternate: God did these things on the third day.
Genesis 1:13 

Genesis 1:14 Then God said, “Let there be lights in the heavens. These lights will separate a day from a night. And let these lights mark days, seasons, and years.
Genesis 1:14 

Genesis 1:15 Let these lights that are in the heavens shine on the earth.” And it was so.
Genesis 1:15 

Genesis 1:16 God made two great lights. He made a bright light that shines during the day. And he made a small light that shines during the night. And he also made the stars.
Genesis 1:16 

Genesis 1:17 God put all of these lights in the heavens to shine on the earth.
Genesis 1:17 

Genesis 1:18 These lights shine during the day and during the night and separate the light from the darkness. God saw these lights. And these lights were good.
Genesis 1:18 

Genesis 1:19 Literal Alternate: That evening and that morning were the fourth day. Dynamic Alternate: God did these things on the fourth day.
Genesis 1:19 

Genesis 1:20 Then God said, “Let many fish and many animals live in the water. And let many birds fly in the sky above the earth.”
Genesis 1:20 

Genesis 1:21 And so God created the big animals that were living in the ocean. And he created all of the living things that were moving in the ocean. He created all of the kinds of the living things that were in the ocean. And he also created all of the birds. He created all of the kinds of birds. He saw all of these animals. And these animals were good.
Genesis 1:21 

Genesis 1:22 
Genesis 1:22 

Genesis 1:23 
Genesis 1:23 

Genesis 1:24 Then God said, Literal Alternate: “Let the land produce living animals, Dynamic Alternate: “Let different kinds of animals appear on the land End of Alternates. Let there be livestock, animals that crawl on the ground, and wild animals. And each kind of animal will produce the same kind of animal.” And it was so.
Genesis 1:24 

Genesis 1:25 God made all of the wild animals, all of the livestock, and all of the animals that crawled on the ground. Those animals always gave birth to babies that were the same kind of animal. God saw all of those animals and knew that they were good.
Genesis 1:25 

Genesis 1:26 Then God said, “Let's create people now. Those people will have our image. They'll rule the fish that are in the ocean and the birds that are in the sky. They'll rule the livestock, the wild animals, and the animals that crawl on the ground.”
Genesis 1:26 

Genesis 1:27 And so God created people. Those people had God's image. God created those people. And those people had God's image. God created one man and one woman.
Genesis 1:27 

Genesis 1:28 Then God blessed those people and said to them, “Be fruitful. And multiply. Rule all of the things that are on the earth. Rule the fish that are in the ocean and the birds that are in the sky. Rule all of the animals that move on the ground.”
Genesis 1:28 

Genesis 1:29 Then God said to those people, “I'm giving you all of the plants that produce seeds on the earth and all of the trees that produce fruit that contains seeds. You may eat those plants and that fruit.
Genesis 1:29 

Genesis 1:30 And I created all of the green plants for all of the big animals, all of the birds that are in the sky, and all of the animals that move on the ground. All of the living animals will eat the green plants.” And it was so.
Genesis 1:30 

Genesis 1:31 God saw all of the things that he made. And he knew that those things were very good. Literal Alternate: That evening and that morning were the sixth day. Dynamic Alternate: God did these things on the sixth day.
Genesis 1:31 


Title: God rests on the seventh day.
Genesis 2:1 So the heavens, the earth, and all of the things that were in them were created.
Title: Allah baistirehat pada hari nang katujuh.
Genesis 2:1 Maka langit, bumi, wan samuaan banda-banda di dalam itu tuntung dijadiakan.

Genesis 2:2 God finished working on the sixth day. So on the seventh day he rested.
Genesis 2:2 Allah tuntung bagawi pada hari nang kaanam. Maka hari nang katujuh, Inya baistirehat.

Genesis 2:3 Then God blessed the seventh day. He caused the seventh day to be holy because he rested on it. He didn't work on the seventh day.
Genesis 2:3 Lalu Allah mambarakahi hari nang katujuh. DiulahNya hari nang katujuh suci lantaran Inya baistirehat pada hari nang katujuh. Inya kada bagawi pada hari nang katujuh.

Genesis 2:4 
Genesis 2:4 Maka Allah Al Khalik manjadiakan samuaan banda-banda di dalam langit wan samuaan banda-banda nang baada di bumi. Bumi wan langit dijadiakanNya.

Genesis 2:5 
Title: Adam wan Hawa bagana di Eden.
Genesis 2:5 Pada jaman nang itu tanaman-tanaman kada tumbuh di bumi. Allah Al Khalik kada manurun hujan. Lalu Inya kada manjadiakan urang-urang nang cagar maharagu tanaman-tanaman.

Genesis 2:6 But water came from the ground. It flowed to all of the places that were on the earth.
Genesis 2:6 Tagal banyu kaluar matan tanah. Itu maaliri samuaan daerah-daerah di bumi.

Genesis 2:7 Then the LORD God created a man and used the dust that was on the ground to make his body. Then God breathed into that man's nose. And so he caused that man to become alive.
Genesis 2:7 Lalu Allah Al Khalik manjadiakan manusia lalu manggunaakan dabu di atas tanah handak maulah awaknya. Lalu Inya hidung urang nang itu. Maka diulahNya urang nang itu hidup.

Genesis 2:8 God made a garden that was in the eastern region. The name of that garden was Eden. God put the man that he created in that garden.
Genesis 2:8 Allah maulah kabun di daerah timur. Ngaran kabun nang itu adalah Eden. Allah mambuati di kabun nang itu urang nang dijadiakan ulih Inya.

Genesis 2:9 The LORD God caused many beautiful trees and many trees that produced good fruit to grow in that garden. God also put two special trees in the middle of that garden. The fruit that is on one of those trees causes people to live forever. And the fruit that is on the other tree causes people to know about good things and evil things.
Genesis 2:9 Allah Al Khalik maulah banyak puhun nang rindang wan banyak puhun nang mahasilakan bubuahan nang nyaman dimakan tumbuh di kabun nang itu. Inya jua manumbuhakan dua rapun puhun nang istimewah di tangah-tangah kabun nang itu. Buah di salah sarapun puhun nang itu maulah urang-urang hidup salawasan. Lalu buah di puhun nang lain maulah urang-urang tahu lawan napa-napa nang baik wan napa-napa nang jahat.

Genesis 2:10 There was a river in Eden. It carried water to all of the plants that were in that garden. After that river flowed through Eden, that river divided into four rivers.
Genesis 2:10 Ada sabuah sungai nang di Eden. Itu maaliri banyu ka samuaan tanaman-tanaman di kabun nang itu. Imbah itu maalir malalui Eden, hanyar itu tabagi manjadi ampat buah sungai.

Genesis 2:11 The name of the first river is Pishon. That river flows through Havilah. There is gold in Havilah.
Genesis 2:11 Ngaran sungai nang panambaian adalah Pison. Sungai nang itu maalir malalui Hawila. Ada amas di Hawila.

Genesis 2:12 (The gold that is in that land is good. Perfume and onyx also are in Havilah.)
Genesis 2:12 (Amas di banua nang itu bagus. Minyak harum wan batu krisopras baada di Hawila jua.)

Genesis 2:13 The name of the second river is Gihon. That river flows through Cush.
Genesis 2:13 Ngaran sungai nang kadua adalah Gihon. Sungai nang itu maalir malalui Kush.

Genesis 2:14 The name of the third river is Tigris. That river flows along the eastern border of Assyria. And the name of the fourth river is Euphrates.
Genesis 2:14 Ngaran sungai nang katalu adalah Tigris. Sungai nang itu maalir di subalah tambit timur Asyur. Wan ngaran sungai nang kaampat adalah Efrat.

Genesis 2:15 So <<after the LORD God created that man,>> he put that man in the garden of Eden to take care of the plants.
Genesis 2:15 Maka <<imbah Allah Al Khalik manjadiakan manusia nang itu,>> hanyar Inya mambuati urang nang itu di kabun nang bangaran Eden gasan maharagu tanaman-tanaman.

Genesis 2:16 Then the LORD God said to that man, “You may eat the fruit that is on all of the trees that are in this garden.
Genesis 2:16 Lalu Allah Al Khalik baucap lawan urang nang itu, “Ikam kawa mamakan bubuahan di samuaan pupuhunan di kabun nang ini <<kacuali buah nang baada di sarapun puhun>>.

Genesis 2:17 But you must not eat the fruit that causes you to know about good things and evil things. If you eat that fruit, you'll certainly die.”
Genesis 2:17 Tagal ikam musti kada bulih mamakan bubuahan nang maulah ikam tahu lawan napa-napa nang baik wan napa-napa nang jahat. Amun ikam mamakan buah nang itu, ikam musti mati.”

Title: God creates the first woman.
Genesis 2:18 Then the LORD God said, “It isn't good that this man is alone. I'll make a companion who will help this man.”
Title: Allah manjadiakan bibinian nang panambaian.
Genesis 2:18 Lalu Allah Al Khalik baucap, “Kada baik urang nang ini saurangan haja. Aku handak maulah pasangan nang cagar mambantu urang nang ini.”

Genesis 2:19 God had already created all of the animals and the birds from the dust that was on the ground. So he brought all of those animals and all of those birds to that man so that he could name them. Then that man named all of the living animals and all of the birds <<that God brought to him>>.
Genesis 2:19 Allah sudah manjadiakan samuaan hewan-hewan wan burung-burung matan dabu di atas tanah. Maka dibawaNya samuaan hewan-hewan nang itu wan samuaan burung-burung nang itu ka urang nang itu sakira inya kawa mangarani bubuhannya. Lalu urang nang itu mangarani samuaan hewan-hewan nang hidup wan samuaan burung-burung <<nang dibawa ka inya ulih Allah>>.

Genesis 2:20 So that man named the livestock, the birds that were in the sky, and the wild animals. <<God called that man 'Adam'.>> But Adam didn't see an animal that was able to help him. Footnote: 'Adam' means 'man'.
Genesis 2:20 Maka urang nang itu mangarani binatang-binatang, wan hewan-hewan nang liar burung-burung di langit. <<Allah mangarani urang nang itu 'Adam'.>> Tagal Adam kada malihat hewan nang bisa mambantunya. 
Footnote: 'Adam' baarti 'urang'.

Genesis 2:21 So the LORD God caused Adam to sleep deeply. While Adam was sleeping, God took one rib out of his body. Then he healed Adam's skin.
Genesis 2:21 Maka Allah Al Khalik maulah Adam guring janak. Wayah Adam guring, Inya mancabut sabilah tulang rusuk di awaknya. Lalu kulimbit Adam diwarasakanNya.

Genesis 2:22 Then the LORD God made a woman from the rib that he took out of the man. And God brought that woman to that man.
Genesis 2:22 Lalu Allah Al Khalik maulah bibinian matan tulang rusuk nang dicabut di urang ulih Inya lalu inya dibawaNya ka urang nang itu.

Genesis 2:23 <<After Adam saw that woman,>> he said, “God made this person from one of my bones and made her flesh from my flesh! I'll call this person 'woman' because God made this person from a man.”
Genesis 2:23 <<Imbah Adam malihat bibinian nang itu,>> hanyar inya baucap, “Allah maulah bibinian nang ini matan salah satulangku! Lalu Inya maulah daging bibinian nang ini matan dagingku! Aku handak manyambat bibinian nang ini 'bibinian' lantaran Inya maulah bibinian nang ini matan urang.”

Genesis 2:24 Therefore, a man leaves his father and his mother to marry a woman. God joins the woman to the man so that they could become one body.
Genesis 2:24 Maka ada saikung urang nang maninggalakan abahnya wan umanya handak mangawini bibinian. Allah manyatuakan urang wan bibinian sakira bubuhannya kawa manjadi saawak.

Genesis 2:25 Adam and his wife were naked. But they weren't ashamed.
Genesis 2:25 Adam wan bininya batilanjang bulat. Tagal bubuhannya kada marasa supan.



