Migabac-Unchurched Adults and English-Churched Adults

Ruth Introduction - Ruth Introduction

Title: God takes care of Ruth.
Ruth Introduction 1:1 The book named Ruth shows us that when God's people suffer, he takes care of them. (See Romans 8:28.)
Yowa hodocine: Wapongti Ruti damongkegac.
Ruti Introduction 1:1 Wapong ngic-ngigacfocine doic ngageebongka, yedi yenge damongebagac hibi wacine Ruti yedi nonge edaligac. (Ngengi Roma 8:28 nganining.)

Ruth Introduction 1:2 This book shows us that God takes care of the Israelites and other people also. God takes care of all of the people who believe in him and obey him.
Ruti Introduction 1:2 Hibi yagodi nonge edaligac Wapong Israel ngic-ngigac nga ngic-ngigac monicte momoc damongebagac. Yedi ngic-ngigac ye ngagesinggaing, nga ye obeykegaing, yenge damongebagac.

Ruth Introduction 1:3 The young woman named Ruth was a Moabite. The Moabites were the Israelites' enemies. Previously God promised the Israelites that he would take care of them. But in this book he also took care of Ruth.
Ruti Introduction 1:3 Ngigac wacine Ruti soc-gboli ye Moap-ngigac. Moap-ngigac Israel ngic-ngigac losifocngineng. Esecne Wapongti Israel ngic-ngigac mipangwec yedi yenge damongebawec. Aimebac, hibi yago??? Yedi Ruti momoc damongkewec.

Ruth Introduction 1:4 This book tells us that Ruth's husband died. So Ruth didn't have a person who will take care of her. But she decided to follow the Israelites' God. This story shows us that God blessed Ruth because she trusted in him and because she loved her mother-in-law named Naomi. Ruth went to Naomi's country with her. And God blessed Ruth there.
Ruti Introduction 1:4 Ruti ngaweine homawec hibi yagodi nonge edogac. Edome ngic Ruti damongkewec, ye yedi mi aiwec. Aimebac, Ruti Israel ngic-ngigac Wapongnginengnoga, yogolec ngage-motowec. Siduc yagodi nonge edaligac Ruti Wapong ngagepangwecte ailu nga yedi sefengine wacine Naomi kweledi angackewecte ailu yedi ye mimi-madic miwec. Yedi Naomiholec himongina hikeiboc. Hikeme Wapongti yogowa Ruti mimi-madic miwec.

Ruth Introduction 1:5 A man named Boaz took care of Ruth. Similarly, Jesus takes care of us. Boaz was in the same family that Ruth and Naomi were in. So he was the person who should take care of Ruth. (See Ruth 3:9.)
Ruti Introduction 1:5 

Ruth Introduction 1:6 Similarly, Jesus is in our family because he became a human who was like us. So Jesus takes care of us, who believe in him, and who are his people. (See Romans 1:3 and Hebrews 2:14.)
Ruti Introduction 1:6 

Ruth Introduction 1:7 Boaz paid for Naomi's field. Similarly, Jesus paid for our sins. He paid for our sins to bring us to God. (See 1 Peter 1:18-19.)
Ruti Introduction 1:7 

Ruth Introduction 1:8 Boaz was willing to help Ruth. He married Ruth because her husband died. Similarly, Jesus is willing to help us. He saves us from death and our sins and calls us 'his brothers' 'and his sisters'. (See Ruth 3:11, Ruth 4:9-10, and Hebrews 2:11.)
Ruti Introduction 1:8 

Ruth Introduction 1:9 The book named Ruth tells the following things to us:
Ruti Introduction 1:9 

Ruth Introduction 1:10 1) Naomi suffered. But Ruth loved Naomi and trusted in her God. See Ruth 1:1-22.
Ruti Introduction 1:10 

Ruth Introduction 1:11 2) Boaz was kind to Ruth and helped her. See Ruth 2:1-23.
Ruti Introduction 1:11 

Ruth Introduction 1:12 3) Ruth met Boaz at the threshing floor. See Ruth 3:1-18.
Ruti Introduction 1:12 

Ruth Introduction 1:13 4) Boaz married Ruth. See Ruth 4:1-17.
Ruti Introduction 1:13 

Ruth Introduction 1:14 5) King David was Boaz and Ruth's descendant. See Ruth 4:18-22.
Ruti Introduction 1:14 



