Migabac and English-Churched Adults

Ruti  -  Ruth

Title: Elimelech and Naomi move from Bethlehem to Moab.
Ruth 1:1 When judges were ruling Israel, there was a famine in Israel. A certain man was from Bethlehem, which was in Judah. That man, his wife, and his two sons moved from Bethlehem to a country named Moab to live there for a few years. Footnote: Before the Israelites had kings, the judges were the leaders of Israel.
Yowa hodocine: Elimelec nga Naomi yeki Betelehem hegilelu Moap hikelu gagabiyec.
Ruti 1:1 Mimocto-mimocto ngicti Israel damongkebong gabong, dameng iwa nosingte loloc Israel himong kwelina gawec. Ngic monic Betelehem Yuda kwelina gawec, yogo iwacni kwesiwec. Hifa gocne ngic yogo nga ngigacine ailu madeckecine yenge Moap kwelina ganogale yengi Betelehem hegilelu himong monic wacine Moap yogo hikelu gaibong. 
Yowa dumengina: Israel ngic-ngigac yengi ngictau mi baibongkahac, dameng iwa mimocto-mimocto ngic yenge Israel micnengineng gaibong.

Ruth 1:2 That man's name was Elimelech. Elimelech's wife's name was Naomi. One son's name was Mahlon. And the other son's name was Kilion. Elimelech and Naomi were in Ephrah's clan. That family was living in a town named Bethlehem, which was in <<the region named>> Judah. But they went to a country named Moab and lived there.
Ruti 1:2 Ngic yogo wacine Elimelec. Elimelec ngigacine wacine Naomi. Madec moniyang wacine Malong. Nga madec monicte wacine Kilion. Elimelec nga Naomi yeke Efratale aling gaiboc. Taon monic wacine Betelehem yogo himong wacine Yuda yogo kwelina gawec, yogo kwelina golowac yogo gaibong. Aimebac, yogo himong monic wacine Moap yogowa hikelu yogo kwelina gaibong.

Ruth 1:3 Later Elimelech, who was Naomi's husband, died. So Naomi lived with her two sons.
Ruti 1:3 Lobeina Elimelec Naomi ngaweine, yedi homawec. Ilec ailu Naomi madeckecineholec gaibong.

Ruth 1:4 <<Naomi's sons grew up <<and became men>>.>> They married women who were from Moab. One son married a woman named Orpah. And the other son married a woman named Ruth. That family continued living in Moab for about ten years.
Ruti 1:4 {Naomi madeckecinedi sugulelu {ngic-ngigac aiiboc}.} yeki ngigac Moapwacni bacepaiboc. Madec moniyangti ngigac monic wacine Oropa ye bawec. Nga madec monicte yedi ngigac monic wacine Ruti ye bawec. Hifa 10 ngama ingucne golowac yogo Moap kwelina gacguibong.

Ruth 1:5 Then Mahlon and Kilion also died. So Naomi didn't have her sons or her husband.
Ruti 1:5 Gacgubong Malong nga Kilion yeke momoc homaiboc. Ilec ailu Naomi madeckecine nga ngaweine mi aiwec.

Ruth 1:6 While Naomi was living in Moab, she heard that the LORD was taking care of his people who were in Israel. The LORD was giving food to those people. So Naomi prepared to return to Bethlehem. Naomi's daughters-in-law also prepared to go to Bethlehem with her.
Ruti 1:6 Naomi Moap kwelina gawec dameng iwa ngageme Sugucne ngic-ngigac Israel kwelina gaibong, yenge damongebalu gawec. Yedi nosing yelelu gawec. Ilec ailu Naomi Betelehem hefaliyelu hikenogale efeckewec. Naomi yengaukecine yeholec Betelehemka hikenogale momoc efeckeiboc.

Ruth 1:7 Then Naomi and her two daughters-in-law left the place where they were living and started walking on the road that led to Judah.
Ruti 1:7 Aime Naomi nga yengaukecine yengi yengi macta gaibong, yogo hegilelu Yudale yefewa hikeibong.

Ruth 1:8 But Naomi said to her two daughters-in-law, “My daughters, return to your mothers' houses. May the LORD be kind to you like you were kind to your dead husbands and me.
Ruti 1:8 Aimebac, Naomi yengaukecinela yanguc miwec, “Adukecne, ngeki nenggackecnginecte mac hefaliyelu hikenic. Ngeki ngawekecnginec homalu nga na aibaba madicne ainoleiboc, silic ingucne Sugucnedi ngeke aibaba madicne aingetedaic.

Ruth 1:9 May the LORD give new husbands to you so that you can rest.” Then Naomi kissed her daughters-in-law. And Naomi and her daughters-in-law wept loudly.
Ruti 1:9 Ngeki ngiye-ngagec nalic aickedaicte Sugucnedi ngawe gbolicne lacnodaic.” Ilec ailu Naomidi yengaukecine kokocepalu nga yeki yenge uc sugucneholec hiyaibong.

Ruth 1:10 Then Naomi's daughters-in-law said to her, “We'll certainly go to your people with you.”
Ruti 1:10 Aime Naomi yengaukecine yela yanguc miiboc, “Noki gaholec ngic-ngigacfocgonela noine hikedabelengte.”



