English-Unchurched Adults

Ruth

Title: Elimelech and Naomi move from Bethlehem to Moab.
Ruth 1:1 When judges were ruling Israel, there was a famine in Israel. A certain man was from Bethlehem, which was in Judah. That man, his wife, and his two sons moved from Bethlehem to a country named Moab to live there for a few years. 
Footnote: Before the Israelites had kings, the judges were the leaders of Israel.
Ruth 1:2 That man's name was Elimelech. Elimelech's wife's name was Naomi. One son's name was Mahlon. And the other son's name was Kilion. Elimelech and Naomi were in Ephrah's clan. That family was living in a town named Bethlehem, which was in <<the region named>> Judah. But they went to a country named Moab and lived there.
Ruth 1:3 Later Elimelech, who was Naomi's husband, died. So Naomi lived with her two sons.
Ruth 1:4 <<Naomi's sons grew up <<and became men>>.>> They married women who were from Moab. One son married a woman named Orpah. And the other son married a woman named Ruth. That family continued living in Moab for about ten years.
Ruth 1:5 Then Mahlon and Kilion also died. So Naomi didn't have her sons or her husband.
Ruth 1:6 While Naomi was living in Moab, she heard that the LORD was taking care of his people who were in Israel. The LORD was giving food to those people. So Naomi prepared to return to Bethlehem. Naomi's daughters-in-law also prepared to go to Bethlehem with her.
Ruth 1:7 Then Naomi and her two daughters-in-law left the place where they were living and started walking on the road that led to Judah.
Ruth 1:8 But Naomi said to her two daughters-in-law, “My daughters, return to your mothers' houses. May the LORD be kind to you like you were kind to your dead husbands and me.
Ruth 1:9 May the LORD give new husbands to you so that you can rest.” Then Naomi kissed her daughters-in-law. And Naomi and her daughters-in-law wept loudly.
Ruth 1:10 Then Naomi's daughters-in-law said to her, “We'll certainly go to your people with you.”
Ruth 1:11 But Naomi said, “My daughters, return to your houses. Why should you come with me? <<I won't be able to take care of you.>> Will I give birth to more sons who will become your husbands?
Ruth 1:12 My daughters, return to your parents' houses. I'm not able to marry another man because I'm too old. I don't hope to marry another man. Even if I marry a man tonight, and even if I give birth to sons, will you wait for them to grow up?
Ruth 1:13 Won't you marry other men? My daughters, I'm very bitter because the LORD treated me badly! <<If you come with me, you also will become very sad.”>>
Ruth 1:14 Then Naomi and her daughters-in-law wept again loudly. Then Orpah kissed Naomi and said goodbye to her. <<And Orpah left Naomi.>> But Ruth hugged Naomi.
Ruth 1:15 Naomi said to Ruth, “Orpah is returning to her people and her gods. Go with Orpah.”
Ruth 1:16 But Ruth said to Naomi, “Don't tell me to leave you. Allow me to go with you. I'll go to the place where you'll go. And I will stay at the place where you'll stay. Your people will become my people. And your God will be my God.
Ruth 1:17 I'll die at the place where you'll die. And I will be buried there. I swear to the LORD that I'll stay with you until I die. If I don't keep this promise, the LORD should punish me severely.”
Ruth 1:18 Naomi realized that Ruth decided to go with her. So Naomi stopped arguing with Ruth.
Ruth 1:19 Then Naomi and Ruth continued traveling to Bethlehem. When Naomi and Ruth arrived in Bethlehem, the people who were living there became excited. The women who were living in Bethlehem asked each other, “Is this woman Naomi?”
Ruth 1:20 But Naomi said to those people, “Don't call me 'Naomi'. Call me 'Mara' because the LORD Almighty caused me to become very bitter.” 
Footnote: Naomi means 'sweet'. But Mara means 'bitter'.
Ruth 1:21 Then Naomi said, “When I left Bethlehem, I had many good things. But the LORD took those things away from me. So why should you call me 'Naomi'? The LORD caused me to suffer. The LORD Almighty caused bad things to happen to me.”
Ruth 1:22 So Naomi returned from Moab. And Ruth, who was from Moab, went to Bethlehem with Naomi. Naomi and Ruth arrived in Bethlehem during the time when people started harvesting barley.

Title: Ruth meets Boaz.
Ruth 2:1 Naomi had a relative named Boaz. Boaz and Elimelech were in the same clan. People respected Boaz highly. <<Boaz was living in Bethlehem.>> And he was rich.
Ruth 2:2 One day Ruth, who was from Moab, said to Naomi, “Let me go to the fields. I'll pick up barley that will be left in the fields. I'll work behind people who will be kind to me.” Naomi said to Ruth, “My daughter, go.”
Ruth 2:3 So Ruth left and entered a field. She started walking behind some people who were harvesting barley. And she picked up the barley that those people didn't gather. She was working in a field that belonged to Boaz. Boaz and Elimelech were in the same clan.
Ruth 2:4 Then Boaz arrived from Bethlehem. He said to the people who were harvesting the barley, “May the LORD be with you!” And those people said to Boaz, “May the LORD bless you!”
Ruth 2:5 Then Boaz asked the leader of the workers, Literal Alternate: “To whom does that young woman belong?”, Dynamic Alternate: “Who is that young woman?”
Ruth 2:6 That leader answered Boaz, “That woman is from Moab. That woman came from Moab here with Naomi.
Ruth 2:7 That woman said to me, ‘Please let me glean behind the workers who are harvesting barley. And let me gather barley between the sheaves.’ <<So I let that woman glean behind the workers.>> That woman came into this field in this morning and worked continuously. She rested for a few minutes in the shelter.”
Ruth 2:8 <<So Boaz walked to Ruth.>> Then he said to Ruth, “My daughter, listen to me. Don't go to another field to glean. Don't leave this field. But stay in this field with the women who are working for me.
Ruth 2:9 Watch the field where the men are harvesting barley. And follow the women. I told the men not to touch you. Whenever you become thirsty, go to those containers. And drink the water that is in those containers that the men filled.”
Ruth 2:10 Then Ruth bowed to Boaz and put her face to the ground. Then she asked Boaz, “Why are you kind to me? I'm a foreigner.”
Ruth 2:11 Boaz answered Ruth, “People told me about all of the things that you did for your mother-in-law after your husband died. You left your father, your mother, and the land where you were born. And you came to this land to live with people that you didn't know.
Ruth 2:12 May the LORD bless you because you did good things. And may he, who is the God of Israel, reward you. You came to the LORD like a young bird comes to its mother. The mother's wings protect that young bird.”
Ruth 2:13 Then Ruth said to Boaz, “My master, I hope that you'll continue treating me very kindly. Although I'm not one of your servants, you comforted me. And you spoke kindly to me.”
Ruth 2:14 When Boaz and his workers started eating, he said to Ruth, “Come here and eat bread. You may dip the bread in this vinegar.” So Ruth sat down beside the workers. Then Boaz gave Ruth some grain that was roasted. Ruth ate that grain until she was full. And she still had more grain <<that she didn't eat>>.
Ruth 2:15 Then Ruth stood up to start gleaning again. Then Boaz commanded the men who were working for him, “Let Ruth gather the barley that is near the sheaves and don't tell her to stop gleaning.
Ruth 2:16 And pull some stalks out of the sheaves for Ruth and drop them on the ground so that she could pick them up. And don't tell Ruth to stop gathering barley.”
Ruth 2:17 So Ruth gleaned in that field until the evening. After Ruth threshed the barley, she had about 30 pounds of barley.
Ruth 2:18 Then Ruth carried the barley to the town. And Ruth's mother-in-law saw the barley that she gathered. Ruth also showed Naomi the extra food that she didn't eat earlier. And Ruth gave that food to Naomi.
Ruth 2:19 Ruth's mother-in-law asked her, “Where did you glean today? Where did you work? May the LORD bless the man who helped you!” Then Ruth told her mother-in-law about the owner of the field where she worked. Ruth said, “The name of the man that I worked with today is Boaz.”
Ruth 2:20 Naomi said to her daughter-in-law, “May the LORD bless Boaz! The LORD is kind to living people and dead people.” Naomi also said to Ruth, “Boaz is our close relative. Boaz is one of our guardian-redeemers.”
Ruth 2:21 Then Ruth, who was from Moab, said, “Boaz also said to me, ‘Stay with my workers until they finish harvesting all of my grain.’”
Ruth 2:22 Then Naomi said to Ruth, who was her daughter-in-law, “My daughter, you should continue working with the women who work for Boaz. If you work in another man's field, people might hurt you.”
Ruth 2:23 So Ruth continued working with the women who worked for Boaz. She gathered barley until the workers finished harvesting the barley. Then she gathered wheat until the workers finished harvesting the wheat. And she lived with her mother-in-law.


